---
layout: post
title: "When Decluttering Becomes Clutter: The Trap of Worrying About Stuff"
description: "Is worrying about removing stuff the same as owning stuff?"
headline: "When Decluttering Becomes Clutter"
categories: minimalism
tags: 
  - minimalism
imagefeature: ../images/drops.jpg
comments: true
mathjax: null
featured: true
published: true
---

Minimalism encourages us to get stuff out of the way to make room for more in life -- ideally more intangible things and not more stuff. We begin decluttering and worrying about how to get rid of things, if they are really useful, etc. until all we think about is decluttering rather than the intent of minimalism. The problem is that decluttering can take a long time, and the time you spend worrying about getting rid of your stuff isn't really better than worrying about your stuff in the first place. 

The temptation is there -- now that you have less, you want to have the best stuff. You want a cohesive look, a clean aesthetic, a way to show how minimalistic you can look. But this feeling is the same feeling you get when trying to buy your way to style -- the fixation on fixing what you have to fit what you want. The only difference is you are taking away instead of adding. 

I'm not advocating that you don't strive for an aesthetic, but I encourage you to question why it is that you're striving. What is making you unhappy about your space? Why in this moment are you discontented?

To prevent the negative cycle of thinking about stuff, here are my tips for healthy decluttering:

**Spend as little time as possible decluttering.**

Marie Kondo encourages a [tidying party](http://tidyingup.com/), and The Minimalists recommend a [packing party](http://www.theminimalists.com/packing/). The idea is to limit the amount of time you spend worrying about your stuff by making it an event. Remember, it's not a party if it happens every night. They believe that once it's done, it should be done (or mostly) so you can move on with your life and focus on what is more important.

**Beware the Diderot effect.**

Or put another way, be wary of buying to replace items in order to achieve a cohesive aesthetic. There's a tendency for people to acquire a single item, say a new pair of boots, and then recognizing the disjointedness in their wardrobe, begin to buy more to match the one item. This effect was coined by Grant McCracken an anthropologist and consumerism scholar in 1988 and was based on a story by French Philosopher Denis Diderot which described the effect after Diderot received a fancy robe. The [Diderot effect](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Diderot_effect) leads to a spiral of consumption, buying more to justify or match what you have already bought.

To some degree, things can be replaced with better things, but the effort it takes to find items, replace them, and find a new home for your old stuff, can mean you spend a lot of time thinking about *things*. Once the thing is gone you are done with thinking about it, but if you're in a constant cycle of decluttering, you are perpetually thinking about one thing after another.

If the aesthetic or function of your stuff is off, rather than buying more replace stuff only when there is a need, or remove it and do without. If you find after a while that you needed that item, then at least you have spent the time considering whether it was worth it.

**Ask yourself, "now what"?**

If you don't have an answer for what to do after decluttering, then you are doomed to decluttering purgatory. There has to be something to move on to, and we can often delay getting the stuff-management over with because we aren't sure what to do afterwards. What do you intend to do with your time? Clearing away is not an end-goal; it's the first step, which should take time initially, but should eventually end (or at least reach a stage of low-level maintenance).

The trend of minimalism lies in conflating decluttering with living simply. There is nothing simple about decluttering -- it is still a fixation on the material, which should be kept to a minimum. Stuff is by no means evil, but spending all of your time worrying about stuff can waste a lot of your precious time and energy.

Share your ideas for life after decluttering below in the comments. 

**Recommendations:**

- [The Diderot Effect: Why We Want Things We Don’t Need — And What to Do About It](http://jamesclear.com/diderot-effect) By James Clear 
- [Understanding the Diderot Effect (and How To Overcome It)](https://www.becomingminimalist.com/diderot/) By Joshua Becker
- [Decluttering Doesn't Work](http://www.theminimalists.com/decluttering/) by The Minimalists
